doc/webhooks_and_callbacks.md, before:

## Webhooks

Garm is designed to auto-scale github runners based on a few simple rules:

  * A minimum idle runner count can be set for a pool. Garm will attempt to maintain that minimum of idle runners, ready to be used by your workflows.
  * A maximum number of runners for a pool. This is a hard limit of runners a pool will create, regardless of minimum idle runners.
  * When a runner is scheduled by github, ```garm``` will automatically spin up a new runner to replace it, obeying the maximum hard limit defined.

To achieve this, ```garm``` relies on [GitHub Webhooks](https://docs.github.com/en/developers/webhooks-and-events/webhooks/about-webhooks). Webhooks allow ```garm``` to react to workflow events from your repository or organization.

In your repository or organization, navigate to ```Settings --> Webhooks```. In the ```Payload URL``` field, enter the URL to the ```garm``` webhook endpoint. The ```garm``` API endpoint for webhooks is:

```
POST /webhooks
```

If ```garm``` is running on a server under the domain ```garm.example.com```, then that field should be set to ```https://garm.example.com/webhooks```.

In the webhook configuration page under ```Content type``` you will need to select ```application/json```, set the proper webhook URL and, really important, **make sure you configure a webhook secret**. Garm will authenticate the payloads to make sure they are coming from GitHub.

The webhook secret must be secure. Use something like this to generate one:

```bash
gabriel@rossak:~$ function generate_secret () { 
    tr -dc 'a-zA-Z0-9!@#$%^&*()_+?><~\`;' < /dev/urandom | head -c 64;
    echo ''
}

gabriel@rossak:~$ generate_secret
9Q<fVm5dtRhUIJ>*nsr*S54g0imK64(!2$Ns6C!~VsH(p)cFj+AMLug%LM!R%FOQ
```

Next, you can choose which events GitHub should send to ```garm``` via webhooks. Click on ```Let me select individual events``` and select ```Workflow jobs``` (should be at the bottom). You can send everything if you want, but any events ```garm``` doesn't care about will simply be ignored.


## The callback_url option

If you want your runners to be able to call back home and update their status as they install, you will need to configure the ```callback_url``` option in the ```garm``` server config. This URL needs to point to the following API endpoint:

```
POST /api/v1/callbacks/status
```

While not critical, this allows instances to call back home, set their own status as installation procedes and send back messages which can be viewed by running:

```bash
garm-cli runner show <runner_name>
```

For example:

```bash
garm-cli runner show garm-f5227755-129d-4e2d-b306-377a8f3a5dfe
+-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| FIELD           | VALUE                                                                                                                                            |
+-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ID              | 1afb407b-e9f7-4d75-a410-fc4a8c2dbe6c                                                                                                             |
| Provider ID     | garm-f5227755-129d-4e2d-b306-377a8f3a5dfe                                                                                                        |
| Name            | garm-f5227755-129d-4e2d-b306-377a8f3a5dfe                                                                                                        |
| OS Type         | linux                                                                                                                                            |
| OS Architecture | amd64                                                                                                                                            |
| OS Name         | ubuntu                                                                                                                                           |
| OS Version      | focal                                                                                                                                            |
| Status          | running                                                                                                                                          |
| Runner Status   | idle                                                                                                                                             |
| Pool ID         | 98f438b9-5549-4eaf-9bb7-1781533a455d                                                                                                             |
| Status Updates  | 2022-05-05T11:32:41: downloading tools from https://github.com/actions/runner/releases/download/v2.290.1/actions-runner-linux-x64-2.290.1.tar.gz |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:32:43: extracting runner                                                                                                           |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:32:47: installing dependencies                                                                                                     |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:32:55: configuring runner                                                                                                          |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:32:59: installing runner service                                                                                                   |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:33:00: starting service                                                                                                            |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:33:00: runner successfully installed                                                                                               |
+-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

This URL if set, must be accessible by the instance. If you wish to restrict access to it, a reverse proxy can be configured to accept requests only from networks in which the runners ```garm``` manages will be spun up. This URL doesn't need to be globally accessible, it just needs to be accessible by the instances.

For example, in a scenario where you expose the API endpoint directly, this setting could look like the following:

```toml
callback_url = "https://garm.example.com/api/v1/callbacks/status"
```

Authentication is done using a short-lived (15 minutes) JWT token, that gets generated for a particular instance that we are spinning up. That JWT token only has access to update it's own status. No other API endpoints will work with that JWT token.

There is a sample ```nginx``` config [in the testdata folder](/testdata/nginx-server.conf). Feel free to customize it whichever way you see fit.

Commit message:

Fix instance JWT token expiration
The instance JWT token expiration time was set at 15 minutes, regardless
of bootstrap timeout. This meant that instances that take longer than 15
minutes, would not be able to send their status updates and github agent
ID back to garm.

Signed-off-by: Gabriel Adrian Samfira <gsamfira@cloudbasesolutions.com>

doc/webhooks_and_callbacks.md, after:

## Webhooks

Garm is designed to auto-scale github runners based on a few simple rules:

  * A minimum idle runner count can be set for a pool. Garm will attempt to maintain that minimum of idle runners, ready to be used by your workflows.
  * A maximum number of runners for a pool. This is a hard limit of runners a pool will create, regardless of minimum idle runners.
  * When a runner is scheduled by github, ```garm``` will automatically spin up a new runner to replace it, obeying the maximum hard limit defined.

To achieve this, ```garm``` relies on [GitHub Webhooks](https://docs.github.com/en/developers/webhooks-and-events/webhooks/about-webhooks). Webhooks allow ```garm``` to react to workflow events from your repository or organization.

In your repository or organization, navigate to ```Settings --> Webhooks```. In the ```Payload URL``` field, enter the URL to the ```garm``` webhook endpoint. The ```garm``` API endpoint for webhooks is:

```
POST /webhooks
```

If ```garm``` is running on a server under the domain ```garm.example.com```, then that field should be set to ```https://garm.example.com/webhooks```.

In the webhook configuration page under ```Content type``` you will need to select ```application/json```, set the proper webhook URL and, really important, **make sure you configure a webhook secret**. Garm will authenticate the payloads to make sure they are coming from GitHub.

The webhook secret must be secure. Use something like this to generate one:

```bash
gabriel@rossak:~$ function generate_secret () {
    tr -dc 'a-zA-Z0-9!@#$%^&*()_+?><~\`;' < /dev/urandom | head -c 64;
    echo ''
}

gabriel@rossak:~$ generate_secret
9Q<fVm5dtRhUIJ>*nsr*S54g0imK64(!2$Ns6C!~VsH(p)cFj+AMLug%LM!R%FOQ
```

Next, you can choose which events GitHub should send to ```garm``` via webhooks. Click on ```Let me select individual events``` and select ```Workflow jobs``` (should be at the bottom). You can send everything if you want, but any events ```garm``` doesn't care about will simply be ignored.


## The callback_url option

Your runners will call back home with status updates as they install. Once they are set up, they will also send the GitHub agent ID they were allocated. You will need to configure the ```callback_url``` option in the ```garm``` server config. This URL needs to point to the following API endpoint:

```
POST /api/v1/callbacks/status
```

Example of a runner sending status updates:

```bash
garm-cli runner show garm-f5227755-129d-4e2d-b306-377a8f3a5dfe
+-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| FIELD           | VALUE                                                                                                                                            |
+-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ID              | 1afb407b-e9f7-4d75-a410-fc4a8c2dbe6c                                                                                                             |
| Provider ID     | garm-f5227755-129d-4e2d-b306-377a8f3a5dfe                                                                                                        |
| Name            | garm-f5227755-129d-4e2d-b306-377a8f3a5dfe                                                                                                        |
| OS Type         | linux                                                                                                                                            |
| OS Architecture | amd64                                                                                                                                            |
| OS Name         | ubuntu                                                                                                                                           |
| OS Version      | focal                                                                                                                                            |
| Status          | running                                                                                                                                          |
| Runner Status   | idle                                                                                                                                             |
| Pool ID         | 98f438b9-5549-4eaf-9bb7-1781533a455d                                                                                                             |
| Status Updates  | 2022-05-05T11:32:41: downloading tools from https://github.com/actions/runner/releases/download/v2.290.1/actions-runner-linux-x64-2.290.1.tar.gz |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:32:43: extracting runner                                                                                                           |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:32:47: installing dependencies                                                                                                     |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:32:55: configuring runner                                                                                                          |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:32:59: installing runner service                                                                                                   |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:33:00: starting service                                                                                                            |
|                 | 2022-05-05T11:33:00: runner successfully installed                                                                                               |
+-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

This URL if set, must be accessible by the instance. If you wish to restrict access to it, a reverse proxy can be configured to accept requests only from networks in which the runners ```garm``` manages will be spun up. This URL doesn't need to be globally accessible, it just needs to be accessible by the instances.

For example, in a scenario where you expose the API endpoint directly, this setting could look like the following:

```toml
callback_url = "https://garm.example.com/api/v1/callbacks/status"
```

Authentication is done using a short-lived JWT token, that gets generated for a particular instance that we are spinning up. That JWT token only has access to update it's own status. No other API endpoints will work with that JWT token. The validity of the token is equal to the pool bootstrap timeout value (default 20 minutes) plus the garm polling interval (5 minutes).

There is a sample ```nginx``` config [in the testdata folder](/testdata/nginx-server.conf). Feel free to customize it whichever way you see fit.
